Systems thinking is a framework to define the behavior of complex structures. In systems thinking, nothing is isolated.  You cannot accurately model a system without considering the interactions of all the parts. A system is defined as a set of interdependent pieces, each of which affects the others towards (or away from) a common goal. Systems must have three main components: elements, interconnections, and purpose. Elements represent the state of the system. Interconnections represent the relations between elements. Purpose is the overarching goal or objective we desire from the system. Every system contains these basic components. 

The use of systems thinking is to better understand the connections which make up the complex behavior of these systems. Systems thinking provides us with a high-level perspective with which we can model the world around us. One real-world system we can analyze is international business. Countries are tightly woven together with the threads of commerce. If one country's production or economy falters, it will affect all the others in a messy, disorganized manner. Another example is the tech industry. Many pieces of modern technology are interdependent with their fellow systems (think of energy producers, the power grid, the internet, the software used, etc). We can even look at a much smaller level; a household can be modeled as a system. The situation of the household (finances, trust, and the various life events that have taken place) affects the actions of each of the household members, which in turn affect the situation. Systems are found in everyday life; thus, systems thinking can enable us to solve complex problems at the micro and macro levels.

A change in one element within a system affects all the others. The results of such events seem unpredictable and random when looked at in isolation. Systems thinking provides us with a method to mathematize such relations. With the relations mathematized we can then go on to prove the properties of the system and evaluate the affects of changing certain variables.

Systems thinking involves the connected application of various abstract thinking skills. There are several main elements to systems thinking. The first is the knowledge and understanding of how one particular system can be 1) fit into larger systems; and 2) broken into subsystems. Every system we used is an vast simplification. It models only a small part of a much larger system. For example, the system of macroeconomics involves the constant interaction between different businesses to achieve overall economic stability and progress for the nation. This nation, in turn, fits into the international economy in which nations trade with each other, forming a much larger system. In addition, every element within that system is an abstraction of another system. Each of these businesses in turn are a subsystem of employees and managers which interact to achieve economic stability and progress for their business. Thus, the interactions within this microeconomy (in small ways) affect the overall macroeconomic picture. 

This understanding informs the next skill, which is knowledge and understanding of the system's internal shape and structure. There are two main components to this skill: recognizing the relations between elements and the feedback loops which form from those relations (where one element affects another element which in turn affects the initial element). The relations between elements dictate the behavior and are essential to predicting the effects within the system. A system where the elements are correct but the relations are inaccurate (or missing) is useless. The feedback loops form the causal connections between elements. These loops define how the change in a particular element now will indirectly affect its value later on.

By considering the effects of the system's structure on the behavior of the system, we can understand how the elements, relations, and variables fit together generate feedback loops. All of these will vary within the system, so it is important to differentiate their types and properties. If we do not understand what each of the pieces do within the loop and how they behave, we will have difficulty effectively understanding the behavior of the feedback loop as a whole. To understand a system, we must be able to simulate, solve, or mentally follow the different relationships within the system.

With careful contemplation of the system's structure, we can abstract and remodel a system to obtain a different or simpler conceptual lens on the system and the problem it is trying to solve. This skill is not a rigid, mathematically defined algorithm; rather, it takes the form of an intuition-led simplification to try and match the system with how the designer's mind works.

In the practical world, the application of systems thinking is known as system dynamics. Initially, systems dynamics attempts to determine why certain corporations succeed or fail from a mathematical or engineering perspective. After enough time, systems dynamics spread to a wide range of areas, anywhere from economics to population predictions. System dynamics uses the principles of systems thinking to solve system problems.

Systems thinking is useful in many domains. There are elements and processes all throughout the real world which isolated models cannot effectively represent due to their interconnectedness with other elements. Thus, we need a way to simulate not only each part individually but also the whole in its entirety. Systems thinking provides us with a way to "keep one eye on the forest and one eye on the trees."



