In a nutshell, a state machine is made of two sets: a set of states (atoms), and a set of transitions between states (each a tuple of an event and two states). Actions/callbacks can be hooked either into transitions or states. Here are the major properties of an idiomatic state machine implementation that I have gathered from my reading:
1. State machines are event driven. Events must be processed in the order they were sent.
2. States and transitions should be "easy" to add (i.e. the logic for other states and transitions need not be changed.

Unfortunately for this comparison, both `statemachine` and `pytransitions` have very similar properties. The first required property can bee satisfied by both `statemachine` and `pytransitions`, although this is not the default mode for `pytransitions`' `statemachine`. Both have very similar mechanisms for creating new transitions or states, which allow for the second property. Both libraries have the ability to execute actions on transitions or on states. Both support conditional transitions.

There is one important conceptual difference. In the `statemachine` library, a new state machine class defines the states and transitions. Actions and conditions can be implemented in a separate model class. The user sends events directly to an instance of the state machine class. In `pytransitions`, however, there is not quite a clear distinction between the data model and the state machine. While the state machine defines the transitions and states, the user sends events to the "model", which is hydrated with event and transition methods by the state machine. Thus, there are no clear lines between what is a data model and what is a state machine. In fact, in some of the examples, the state machine object is used as its own data model. 

The choice between them is difficult due to their high similarity. However, I would choose `statemachine` due to its separation of model and machine. I believe this approach would lead to code which is tidier and more compartmentalized than `pytransitions`